At the present time, the total protein, the ocean
is primarily a source of food protein, either for,
in terms of food, not the total resources of the
ocean, in terms of both food for human beings, fish
that people like to eat and seek, invertebrates
people like to eat, and food for animals, fish
meal, fish flour. Fish meals are fed to chicken and
to livestock.
And the total protein supply that we get this way in
terms of human food is of the order of 12 million
tons a year. 12 to 15 million tons a year of protein.
If you divide that by the number of people on Earth,
how does that look? Let me just do it.
Just any place might be full. Say we have 12 times 10
to the sixth ton. divided by 4 times 10 to the 9
people equals 3 times 10 to the minus third
tons per person equals 3 kilograms per person per
year.
Well, the total program, the total protein
requirement per person is about 50
times 365 equals about 18 kiloamps. So
that for the world as a whole, we're providing
about
The protein requirement we're providing, the
ocean provides
three eight-teens, with one six, about 15, it's
about, six is about 17% as opposed to the world
protein, human protein.
It's actually less than the world protein
consumption, but because Americans and
Europeans and Japanese eat a lot more protein. But
anyhow, this is what people require. Well, it's
not really a major factor in human protein supply.
And it's probably true that we can't get more than
100 million tons of fish out of the ocean by the
present fishing techniques. We've exploited all
resources intelligently.
very effectively. Moreover, this would be quite
an expensive way to get protein. Deep sea fishing
is an energy-intensive business. It uses a lot of
energy.
So I think that, in general, the notion that the
ocean is a great reservoir of protein is, with the
present fishing techniques, is just not so.
our great reservoir of food supply. Of course,
food, we need millions of it. We need something
like the total requirement right now is something
like a billion, 200 million, 300 million, about a
billion and a half million, a billion, 500 million
tons of food, mostly for calories.
But by the development of of ocean farming, we
might be able to increase this
production of things that people like and need
maybe several fold over. And the interesting
thing about ocean farming is that you do it in a
different way than you do it on land. The best
example is the mussel farming that the Spaniards
do. They get about 100 tons to the acre of mussels
maybe 20 tons to the acre of protein, which is
fantastically high. The reason that they're able
to do this is that they put their muscles on ropes or
pilings, but mostly ropes, I think, in an area
where the current constantly sweeps by them. So
that the ocean is fertilizing itself. You're
taking advantage of the organic production in a
large part of the ocean. sweeping by these
mussels, and the mussels all you do is just filter
it out of the water as it goes by. That's why you get
these high yields. And that's the way to do marine
farming, I think, not to take a piece of ocean and
fertilize it. Might as well just use ordinary
agriculture for that. But to take advantage of the
oceans, of the motions of the ocean, to make the
ocean fertilize itself, and to
bring nutrients to a small area. from which you
then get a large crop.
And I think that the energy requirements here are
rather low.
The energy requirements are primarily catching
and handling, not so much energy for fertilizer or
energy for plowing or energy for pumping water.
the ocean will do all that for you. You have to catch
the mussels. You have to hang them there. You have
to pull them up and take them out of their shells and
then do something with them. I would think
particularly of mariculture of organisms like
mussels, oysters, clams, and mussels, which are
filter feeders. therefore can collect are just
essentially little plankton nets, convert the
plankton into something we like to eat, seafood.
Plankton is impossible to eat for a variety of
reasons, one
being it has a lot of silicon. And I wouldn't be
surprised if this were done on
a If we learned how to do this and did it on a large
scale, we couldn't double the protein production
of the ocean. There should be a significant step in
the right direction. Still not.
Still, it would probably be only 20% or 25% of the
total human protein, world population protein
requirements. I don't see how the world
population could possibly be stabilized below 10
or 12 billion people.
Well, so much for mariculture. I had another
question I was going to ask you before we got on
mariculture. It has to do with modifying the
climate on the Earth. You had mentioned twice
ecology. Do you think we can safely experiment, as
a matter of fact, with modifying the climate on the
Earth? Well, we're doing it. We can't do the
paperwork, though. You were going to come back and
report to me. Oh, I forgot. I was wondering if you'd
like a little snack for lunch. It's getting on
toward that time. I don't have any honey, and I
don't have any avocado to make you a honey avocado.
Let me move your coffee pot over here. Yes, I would
very much. Thank you. I think we can wind this thing
up for you in a few minutes here.
What was your question again? I was talking about
modifying it twice or three times in our
conversation. Something's come up with the idea
of the ecology system and modifying the climate.
We are modifying it. We probably are modifying the
climate. That is almost certain. By adding carbon
dioxide to
the atmosphere. And we're adding a lot. We're
adding now. About a half of 1% of the, every year,
we're adding a half of 1% of the atmospheric carbon
dioxide to the atmosphere.
We're pretty close to that. And this is something
that we don't want to do. We're just doing it by
burning fossil fuels. And the real question is,
what's going to happen? It's a great geophysical
experiment in one way. It's also maybe a great
concern to human beings. Now, the ocean enters
into this in a profound way. We're actually
burning fossil fuels about carbon dioxide
production is about 1% of the atmospheric carbon
dioxide every year,
going up to 3% or 4% maybe in 100 years if we keep on
burning coal.
But about half of this at the present time goes into
the ocean. What do you think? An unknown
proportion goes into the biosphere, and maybe not
any goes into the biosphere, but maybe a
significant amount.
The land biosphere,
I think. The reason that we're able to absorb half
of it in the ocean is that the ocean has something
called a bucker mechanism of seawater. That is,
there are carbonate ions in the ocean which have
two negative charges that can be turned into
bicarbonate if you add CO2. Bicarbonate has only
one negative charge.
As long as the carbonate ion is present,
the ocean can absorb CO2 by transforming the
carbonate into bicarbonate. However, it looks as
if, as time goes on, we're going to use up the
carbonate ion in the ocean, and therefore the
ocean won't be able to absorb very much CO2. Most of
it will stay in the atmosphere. So that will make
the situation worse than it is
now. Moreover, if we do this, we're going to heat up
the surface waters of the ocean because the
atmosphere will get warm again. And they won't be
able to hold so much carbonic acid gas. So more
carbon dioxide will get into the air from the
ocean,
because the ocean will be losing it. Moreover,
as the atmosphere heats up and as the ocean surface
layer heats up, there will be more evaporation and
more cloud formation. This may be a
countervailing effect. Nobody really knows what
the effect will be, whether it will increase the
albedo of the earth, that is, the reflectivity, so
we get less incoming radiation, or whether it
will, in fact, increase the temperature in order
to get, because clouds radiate infrared at a lower
temperature than the ground surface does, you may
therefore have to raise the temperature in order
to get enough radiation out to maintain a heat
balance. I'm quite uncertain what's going to
happen. All the climatic models
are fatally weak because they're unable to model
the ocean. And they're unable to modify the cloud
formation of the ocean. You have to learn how to do
this. And this will be, I think, a combination of
observation and theory. It can't be done by either
one alone. You observe cloud formation over the
ocean. You observe the albedo of the clouds and
their infrared radiation and see what happens in
different areas under the variations we now get.
And from this, develop a better theory of cloud
formation and a better theory of the interaction
between the sea and the air.
One thing that's characteristic of the ocean is
that it carries about half the heat. from low
latitudes to high latitudes. The other half is
carried in the air. Nobody knows whether it's 40%
or 50% or 60%. That makes a lot of difference in
models, not in space models. Present
climatological models assume one of two things
about the ocean. Either that the ocean is a swamp
from which water can evaporate but no heat can be
absorbed because it's such a thin layer of water,
or that it's got an infinite heat capacity.
Neither of which is true. The truth is somewhere in
between. And the models just can't take account of
that. I don't think you're going to be able to get
very much further to it unless you have a lot more
studies of the interaction between the sea and the
air. Rather than talk about climate
modification, I'd like to talk about climate and
what's going to happen to it. And the only thing we
can say with any certainty now about climate is
that the climate fluctuates. Sometimes it's one
way, and sometimes it's another. And we know that
it always has fluctuated. The longer the period of
observation, the greater the fluctuation.
That's characteristic of what are called
stochastic processes. And it's very likely that
the climate's going to get worse. It's no more
likely that the climate will get better, but it's
equally likely that it will get worse. It's going
to vary somehow. And we have to be prudent and to act
as if we're going to get worse, even though it may
not.
That means we have to do a lot of things about
agriculture. But in order to know what to do about
agriculture, we have to know what's going to
happen. If the climate does get worse, what does
that mean? Horse latitudes shift north or south.
Does it mean you get more or less precipitation?
Does it mean the pattern of precipitation
changes? Does it mean that the temperature
patterns change? And if so, in what way are they
going to change? Climatology at the present time
is a very primitive science. And half of
climatology is oceanography. But the Global
Atmospheric Research Program, which involves
oceanography as well as meteorology, that it's
just a very important thing to be doing from a
purely practical point of view, let alone from a
theoretical and scientifically interesting
point of view. But, you know, the notion that you
dam up the Bering Sea or run the Amur River into the
Arctic or something like that, these are all
trivial problems compared to the real problem.
What's going to happen to the climate without our
doing a goddamn thing? Except putting CO2 into it.
on a very large scale? Do we have to abandon carbon
dioxide in production? Do we have to abandon the
use of fossil fuels because we're going to change
the climate so drastically by continuing to use
them? Or can we continue to use them and prepare for
what changes will occur?
That leads directly in effect to another question
I have.
The one thing that strikes me as consistent in your
career, if I may use that word, or consistently
apparent in your career, is the scientist as
public man. Do you have any particular
philosophical views about what the scientist's
responsibility is to the public? Well,
personally, he has the same responsibility as
everybody else. He's a good citizen. But he also
has special responsibilities.
because he either knows something that other
people don't know, or because he has ways of
finding out things that other people don't know
about.
And I think that the scientist has maybe two
responsibilities. One is to be an entertainer, to
be, like other artists, give people pleasure and
happiness. And this is particularly obvious with
astronomy. People really are fascinated by
astronomy.
And it has some very deep meaning to people, which
is hard to describe. But you can see it when you look
at an audience being talked to by an astronomer or
by somebody who talks about astronomy. They often
have tears in their eyes. overwhelmingly
emotionally involved in it. And that's the
entertainment aspect of science. Seafloor
spreading, plate tectonics,
whether there's light on Mars, what's the history
of the Earth, what's the history of living
creatures, what's the diversity of living
creatures, all their peculiar and funny ways and
interesting ways.
Let's leave that tentative curtain that we see out
there in front of us. These are all kind of things
that Cousteau does and that many people do. These
are very important aspects of the scientist's
responsibility to the public. After all, the
public's paying for what he does. They ought to get
something out of it. The other thing, of course, is
that the scientist has
the responsibility of laying the basis for a
humane technology, a technology which serves the
interests of people and doesn't disserve the
interests of people. The technologists
themselves have a major responsibility here, but
most modern technology is based on science,
knowledge of nature and knowledge of ourselves
and knowledge of other living creatures,
biological knowledge, scientific knowledge of
living things and of the inanimate world. So I
think
one of the responsibilities of the scientists was
to try
to consider and talk about and think about, or to
consider, think about, and talk about, put them in
that order, what are the likely consequences of
increasing, of increases in scientific
knowledge?
And to do that in such a way that you don't scare
people, but you
give them a chance to make intelligent choices and
intelligent decisions. You can't make the
decisions for them, but you can give them the
knowledge by which they can make better
decisions.
And then the final thing is to do good science.
That's a responsibility, too, because science is
a human activity of,
how to put it, Science is something that people can
do. Finding out about the world and about
ourselves is an important human activity,
something that makes people human. It gives them a
higher humanity and a more intense
experience. Most scientists,
of course, feel this very strongly. I think
they're right
that it's one of the wonderful things about human
beings that they can understand nature, up to a
point at least. And we haven't reached that limit
yet. I don't want to just put you ahead as fast as we
can to find out as much as we can. Maybe we will find
eventually one of two things will happen, that
science becomes so complicated If it loses its
unity and its integrity, therefore people won't
be interested in it. No, it's not necessary. I
mean, it's quite possible that we could develop a
civilization that couldn't care less about
knowing about nature. Alternatively, the
possibility is it will come up against barriers in
our minds or limitations of our own minds and our
own ability to understand. That isn't in sight
yet, but it may be within the next 100 years. I guess
that science is, you can think of science sort of
like you think about population. It can't go on
forever. The rate at which we're learning things
is accelerating. That leads to a discontinuity of
something. An exponential curve is by
fundamentally an unstable, leads to a
discontinuity.
So it can't go on exponentially. In other words,
maybe we'll go like this and level off like that.
Maybe we'll go like this and go like
that. One of those two things might happen. Now, I
have one final question, and you're long
Gosh, I think that's an impossible question to
answer.
You'd have to ask me that 50 years after I'm dead.
I guess the thing that I feel
proudest of It's not saying it's most important,
but one that I feel was a high point of my life was
starting the University of California in San
Diego. You know, that may not turn out very well
after all. Something else may happen, more
important. But so far, I think it's turned out
pretty well. I mean, that was a great experience,
and an experience that very few people have. It
couldn't have happened at any other time In
history, just like it happened, technology and
science were riding high. There was plenty of
money. People thought there were going to be a lot
of people in California. Everything fitted
together. We were just awfully lucky. But we
didn't. Because we were lucky, we managed to do
something that was, in some sense, unique.